mr. vice president it's willie geist
good to have you on this morning really
yesterday at this time we got word that
3.8 five million americans had filed for
unemployment just in the last week that
brought the total to more than 30
million of our fellow Americans over the
last six weeks out of work so there is a
balance that governors are trying to
strike right now from Florida and
Georgia to Connecticut and Colorado of
when to get people back in so what do
you say to people who you're talking to
in wilmington are talking to on the
telephone these days who say i get that
this disease is bad i get that it's
highly contagious but the alternative
here is me sitting losing my job
watching the small business that i spent
my whole life building evaporate that's
worse to me than at least trying to go
back to work what's your message to
those people who are out of work or who
own a small business and are really
hurting right now well first of all it's
a false choice to choose between getting
the disease under control as and getting
it back to work if you don't get disease
under control not much it's gonna happen
we have to get the number of new cases
down and down significantly there needs
to be widespread easily available and
prompt testing the federal government
should be doing more to make this happen
we have to make sure that our hospitals
and healthcare systems are ready for
flare-ups and the disease when it's
going to occur as economic activity
increases and expands and in the
meantime all all the money that's been
passed out by the congress very little
of us getting into that person that you
that that fictitious person you
described a small business one of the
things that i predicted when they passed
the legislation remember there needs to
be there's an oversight that it was
supposed to take place an inspector
general the president got rid of the
inspector general i was put in charge of
getting in the middle of the recession
with the last recession we had the major
recession eight hundred plus billion
dollars eight hundred billion dollars
out to help people get back to work and
help things get set up
we had an inspector general there was an
entire team i put together i was on the
phone every day about three to four
hours a day talking to mayors and
governors
some people letting them know what's
available how would you get something
done it requires immediate and
consistent and overarching focus on what
has to get going and right now right now
we're in a situation where we have an
awful lot of small businesses being told
by the big banks you know you're not
lying you don't get it you're not and
you know we should be moving in a
direction to keep people on the payroll
that's what the money said that the
money was gonna go to larger operations
the the condition was keep people on
your payroll we should be allowing
people to work as they say basically
half time instead if you have ten
workers doing a job and you only need
five keep all ten make the difference up
they they split the jobs and make up the
difference in their salaries by the
federal government in terms of the
stimulus there's a lot of things that we
can do they can fundamentally change the
trajectory so that when this finally
does get under control you still have
those everything from those barber shops
of those hardware stores and those small
drugstores they're able to be open but
when they're gone they're gonna be gone
so mr. vice president you made a comment
last night in an interview with Bob
Kosta of The Washington Post where you
said I view myself as a transition
candidate making way for the mayor
Pete's of the world to come into my
administration some people read that as
you saying you were sort of a
placeholder and that don't worry I'm
gonna open the door to this more
progressive movement perhaps led by
Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren
Alexandria Castillo Cortez and I and
others what did you mean when you called
yourself a transition candidate it
doesn't have to do with philosophy it
has to do with we have not given the
bench the younger people in the party
the opportunity to have the focus and be
in focus for the rest of the country
there's an incredible group of a
talented newer younger people I ran this
time because I think the issues that are
before us or it happened to be in my
wheelhouse there I said from the
beginning we're gonna hear it
a divided country as well as a world and
disarray there are the two things I've
worked on in my whole life I've been
able to get things done in the United
States Senate and as vice president with
the outfit with the other party without
making them the enemy and get things
done unless we can reach consensus this
democracies in trouble and secondly I
have a significant responsibility and
significant experience dealing with the
vast majority of the world leaders to
put back in play our role in the world
we are in you know America first has
made America alone under the Trump
administration our alliances are in
jeopardy our ability to lead the will
Willy we have led not just by the
example of our power but by the power of
our example and we've walked away look
at what's happened with regard to this
pandemic the pandemic is that the
president has no intercourse whatsoever
with the rest of the cousin of the world
I'm dealing with these things we led
like Barack Obama led in the kimono I
mean excuse me and in the pandemic that
occurred when we were in office it was
kept in Africa we organized the world we
put things together that's our job
because we have we don't do it no one's
going to do it as you're now seen mr.
vice president well as you as we close
this interview love for you to say a
word or two about public health care
work about health care workers about
nurses about doctors
we heard the tragic story of a woman who
was in charge of the ER at a New York
Hospital taking her life because she was
so despondent what are you going to do
what will your administration do to
support health care workers not just on
the job but also off the job perhaps
with many of the mental health care
challenges that they are going to be
facing for years to come because what
they have seen already this year they
are going to face it a lot of people are
going to face it look Joe over 600,000
dead many of them are
who are those those those workers those
nurses the doctors some of them because
they put themselves in a position to
save other people's lives protect the
rest of society and we talked about that
number like six hundred plus thousand
people if say one thing fifty thousand
yeah sixty six sixty sixty thousand over
sixty thousand deaths and we talk about
them like they are a number every one of
them left behind a family everyone I'm
left behind friends left behind this is
one at a time they have to be recognized
for what they have done and I hope it
opens up the eyes of the American people
which I think it has to realize there's
so many people every day out there
breaking their necks from people who are
making seven bucks an hour to to hire
two significant medical professionals
and they're all risking their lives for
us I think we have a chance to
fundamentally change the societal
structure on how the inequities that
exists in our in our system once we get
through this because people now realize
these are the people making a difference
first and foremost recognize their
sacrifice they're not asking for that
but they have to know and it's part of
what I've learned you have to know that
what is needed is you have to be
recognized for people knowing that you
are doing something good and decent and
honorable and you're doing it for other
people it's about some empathy it's
about letting them know but beyond that
that's why I proposed in the health care
proposal I put forward that we
significantly increase funding for
mental health we make sure that it's the
same level as physical health there's no
difference whether you have something
wrong in terms of your emotional state
and your brain and any more than it is
if you broke your arm and we have to
lift that whole notion that somehow
there's something that's that that's
that's that makes you less of a person
if you acknowledge you're having serious
mental problems it's predictable this is
going to happen we have to be there to
catch them we have to be there to help
them we have to be there to reinforce
them and that's part of our societal
responsibility
it'll be a major part of what I do in
the health side of this all right mr.
vice president thank you so much for
being with us this morning good luck and
thank you say all right in this
programming note he will also there'll
be Reverend Al Sharpton's show politics
nation and Vice President Biden will
also be his guest tomorrow at 5:00 we
have a lot more to come
Nobel Prize winner Paul Krugman is going
to be our guests one morning Joe comes
right back thanks for checking out MSNBC
on YouTube and make sure you subscribe
to stay up-to-date on the day's biggest
stories and you can click on any of the
videos around us to watch more 4 Morning
Joe and MSNBC thanks so much for
watching